An Evening Conversation with Bobby Jones
“How I Learned to Win”
By Don Potter

The Premise:  Bobby Jones is revered in the history of golf for completing one of golf’s greatest accomplishments – winning the Grand Slam in 1930 which consisted of the British Amateur and Open tournaments, and the U.S. Amateur and Open tournaments.  It is generally thought that Jones – by beating the best golfers from around the world at that time – proved himself to be the greatest ever.  

In the year’s following The Grand Slam the story of Bobby Jones grew through books, instructional videos, and his founding of Augusta National Golf Club (which hosts The Masters Tournament every April). Along with that his legend as a sportsman and his accomplishments, his reputation as a competitor who practiced excellent sportsmanship and was a friend to all of his competitors, grew.  In many instances the “legend of Bobby Jones” depicted a young man who chose to remain an amateur for life, and was someone without flaws, without foibles, and without tarnish on his career and reputation.  His was a reputation to be emulated by all who sought to play the game of golf.  

Research now shows that Bobby Jones was indeed a young man of many talents, but also of many flaws. He was actually a pretty normal person. He married, became a successful attorney and businessman, and enjoyed the game of golf with family and friends.  But as a young competitor he sought perfection in a game that does not allow it.  And, in seeking that perfection, he developed a temper that once it displayed itself on the golf course, caused him embarrassment and at one point, possible expulsion from the game.  Only after conquering his temper and learning how to channel his emotions into focusing on his passionate love for the game of competitive golf did Bobby Jones become a winner.
Tonight’s conversation with Bobby Jones enables the listener to learn about those embarrassing experiences – many of which did not make it into the press, or writings, or histories of Bobby Jones – and hear from the man how they impacted him and became the catalyst for his learning how to win – at golf and at life. 

The purpose then, of this 45-minute engagement, is to listen to Bobby Jones and learn from him “how he learned to win.”  It’s possible the lessons shared here can be applied to not just golf, but to other sports, other activities, and to life.

The Setting:  The setting is a comfortable old den.  There is a nice old leather easy chair in the middle of the stage with an old cocktail table set alongside.  There is a grouping of golf balls on the floor near heads of some golf clubs.  There is another table stage right packed with pictures in fames of varying heights and sizes.  Almost all the photos are of people.  There are no trophies or medals to be seen.

The room is meant to look “lived in” and comfortable.  Behind and above the den set up are two large screens (if possible inside frames) or several easels holding large poster board photos which will show pictures at the right time in the conversation.  The idea is to have the pictures on the screens or easels provide context to the dialogue that the speaker will be having with the audience.  

The Entrance – The lights dim with a spotlight on the chair and the bookcase.  You hear the shuffling of feet and the click of a cane as a man dressed in a tweed blazer with a pocket square with well pressed slacks, shiny shoes, and an open collared button-down shirt meander into the living room from stage left.  He walks slowly, somewhat haltingly, but with good posture.  He uses his cane (which turns out to be an old golf club held by the club head in his left hand) sparingly and mostly for balance.  He walks to a table and pours himself a drink.  He walks to the chair, sits down and gets comfortable. He takes a sip of his bourbon – lets out an audible “Ahhhhh” – and looks up at the audience over his reading glasses.  He stares…he takes off his glasses and places them back in his blazer…and he smiles.

Bobby:
Oh, good evening, everyone.  So good of you to join me. Tonight, I thought we’d gather in my private den for this talk.  Is that ok with you?   

This room is a special place for me because its here that I come when I talk about my past.  You won’t see any trophies or medals in here.  Nope, those things are in museums for others to see.  

In here you will find pictures that are mostly of family and friends as they are reminders of the two things that are most important to me – family and friends.

It’s also in this room where I’ve saved memories; not of my past wins, but rather memories of how I learned to win (with emphasis).  

In most cases, they are painful memories.  But those are the most important ones to savor when it comes to learning how to win.

They say a man should never drink alone.  So, while I sit here sipping on this delicious Kentucky bourbon, I get to share my cocktail – with all of you.  Cheers!
He raises his glass and takes a sip with a nod to the audience.

You’ve come here tonight to learn a little bit more about me and how I learned to win all those tournaments in the 1920’s.  My hope is that you will come away with at least one nugget more than what you’ve already read about me in books or newspapers or heard on the television during The Masters Tournament, held at my course Augusta National, every April. 

Let me say though, at the outset of this conversation, that tonight, and forever after, I want you to know me as Bob Jones.  Not Bobby.  Not Robert. Just plain Bob.  Ok? 

There’s a little secret that only a few people know.  My true friends – the ones I hold closest which also include some of my fiercest competitors such as Walter Hagen and Gene Sarazen – they always knew me as, and called me, “Bob.”  

Screen frames show picture of Walter Hagen and Gene Sarazen

Let me explain…

He takes another sip.  Puts the glass down.  Embraces the cane and stands up.  

Through all the years I played competitive golf, and well into the those following my retirement – sports writers and journalists who covered my exploits - always referred to me as “Bobby.”  

I suppose there wasn’t much I could do about it after my initial showing at 14 years of age at the US Amateur in 1916 which was held at the Merion Golf Club just outside of Philadelphia.  

Show picture of Bobby Jones at Merion, Age 14

Somehow a kid from Atlanta, playing in what was then golf’s greatest major wearing plus-fours buckled at the knee and walking around in borrowed golf shoes would get the moniker of “Bobby” by the press.  It was a name that was easy to read and write.  It also seemed to encapsulate everything that was happening in the world and in sports at the time.

With War in Europe looming, the world needed heroes and the press was willing to comply.

You must remember that when it came to the game of golf it was only three years previous – in 1913 - that the great Francis Ouimet, quite a youngster himself at the time, defeated the great British duo of Harry Vardon and Ted Ray in a playoff for the U.S Open at Brookline outside of Boston.  

Show picture of Francis Ouimet with Vardon and Ray

Francis’ win created a gigantic opening for US golfers to walk through by breaking the stranglehold British golfers had over the sport here in our country at the time.  

Francis was our country’s “David” and slew not one, but two Goliaths from Scotland in his U.S. Open quest.  And then, three years later, here I was, another teenager, again ringing the echoes of Ouimet in the US Amateur.  

To enhance the excitement of this tournament in their writing, they needed a “prop” and I was it.  A kid by the name of “Bobby” was the perfect foil.    
When I think back to that first national tournament experience, I was just a child, playing an adult’s game, against some of the best golfers at the time in the U.S.  

And when you qualify for the event with the low qualifying score in the first round – I shot a 74 – overnight, I became excellent fodder for the national news.  

Show copies of Newspapers from that tournament

Instantly my preferred name got lost in this whirlwind because, with the sportswriters help, suddenly, I had become some kind of “wunderkind” – the next “Francis” - and all everyone wanted to talk and read about was “Bobby from Atlanta.”

Yes, Bobby is an easy name to say and remember. But to me, it became a curse.   

He takes another sip of his bourbon and gets reflective
	
Around my house, growing up, I was called “Little Bob” by my mother.  And starting at an early age after our family moved to the outskirts of Atlanta and the East Lake Country Club, I began to play golf with two childhood friends, Perry Adair and Alexa Sterling.  

Show pictures of Perry Adair and Alexa Sterling as youngsters

Perry and Alexa, would also go on to notable amateur golfing careers of their own, with Alexa winning the 1918 U.S. Women’s Amateur.   

Show picture of Alexa winning the U.S. Women’s Amateur

I wanted my closest friends, like Perry and Alexa, to call me “Bob” yet to the general public I was to be forever known as “Bobby.”  

Did you know my name even made it into poetry after my Merion showing?   On the front page of the Atlanta paper following the day I shot that 74, there appeared in bold print “The War Cry of the Jones” with the following writing:
Show picture of Atlanta Journal Constitution headline

He gets a book from the bookshelf, opens it, finds the page…. does a quick perusal, and then begins to read.


In days of Old there was a Jones/If memory serves me right,
	Who shouted from the quarterdeck/” I’ve just begun to fight.”
	Today the eyes of Southerners/Are facing to the North
	Calling on “Little Bob” their champion/To come and sally forth.
	And as the acid test draws near/He rises to his might.
	And these – the tones of Bobby Jones/” I’ve just begun to fight!”


It would be seven years after that poem (emphasis) was written that I would finally breakthrough and win some tournaments.  
While battle over my name would continue for the rest of my life it would be a much longer fight for me to learn how to win golf tournaments and understand how to take control of those things that I could control and let go of those I could not. 

He moves back to the chair and sits down

Bobby Jones. Ugh. (Whispering to himself)

Many of the people who wrote about me in the 1920’s say my accomplishments in golf were accompanied by stories told that were more “myth” than reality.  They say my exploits were a “creation” that came from the typewriters of the sportswriters of the 1920’s – such as Grantland Rice, or Paul Gallico, or even the golf writer considered to be the greatest of them all, Bernard Darwin.  

Show pictures of the sportwriters mentioned.

These writers loved to write columns about the winners and champions of the day from every sport.  

Show photos of the athletes to be mentioned.

Let’s see, at that time you had Babe Ruth in baseball; Jack Dempsey in boxing; Red Grange in football; Bill Tilden in tennis – each were idolized by the press and their exploits were well chronicled and sold to an adoring public.  And these winners “had no flaws.”

Back in the ‘20’s The Babe and others like him enjoyed and basked in the spotlight of the press and the adoration of the galleries to turned out to watch them perform.  Even my golf professional friends, Walter Hagen and Gene Sarazen sought out the pressure of the spotlight as they believed it enhanced their focus and desire to win, while also making money and securing endorsements. 

But as I have been trying to share with you, this myth-making, which included the public calling me “Bobby” as if I was one of their own, made me uncomfortable.  Once I got behind the curtain of success, I felt a pressure to succeed and not disappoint that was unbearable.  I did not wish to disappoint my dad, my family, my friends, and all of Atlanta.  

Even during the days of my playing competitive golf all I ever really wanted was to be a person who loved his family, enjoyed his friends, found time to read and learn, and to play the game golf (with emphasis)  

I did enjoy the spirited engagement of a friendly Nassau-wager on the course.

I relished telling or listening to a bawdy joke shared in the locker Room.

Sipping a good corn whisky or Kentucky bourbon, and even occasionally enjoying a smoke, was a respite I cherished.  

But somehow those real attributes of mine never made it into the sports pages.

But, my friends, I was very much real with flaws and foibles…just like everyone else.
This Bob Jones (pointing to himself) was real.  And being a real person in the era of god-creation was hard.  

Simply trying every day to live up to all the expectations written about me AND then win golf tournaments – especially ones you were supposed to win before you ever set a foot on the course – became a daily pressure cooker for me at a very early age.    

And the pressure to be perfect for everyone – to be that god-like performer like The Babe or Red Grange – was immense starting with that first tournament at Merion.  

Walks over to the bookcase, adds some ice, and tops off the glass
Walks back to Center Stage

The pressure I just described lasted my entire competitive golfing career.  

Yet I could not rid myself of it until I channeled it differently by learning the secret of how to win.   Because it was one other non-god-like attribute I needed to control – not smoking or alcohol – but my excessive temper.

Controlling my temper and learning how to win is an incredibly straight-forward and simple concept…. but it is a very difficult thing to do for many who expect perfection. 

Especially for me. 

So let me now share with you a few painful stories, not just about how I learned to win, but I am also going to tell you a story of where it all came together and the role Skokie Country Club played in this epiphany while I was competing in the 1922 US Open.  

That tournament and experience launched me on a trajectory to some of the best championship golf ever played and culminated in my winning golf’s Grand Slam in 1930.  

I finally came face to face with the secret of winning in the year of 1921.  I am sure of it.  

There were two major happenings in 1921, built upon a lifetime of outward displays of anger and frustration on the golf course, that caused me to face the real reason I was not winning.  

They say that to be successful in golf, it is 10% talent and 90% of what is “between the ears”, that determines a champion.  I agree with that - with one stipulation – you need a strong connection to “what is between the ears” and “what is in your heart to win”.  THAT is the difference.

Show the quote on the screen

For me, if I ever was going to win at golf, I need to make the connection between my brain and my heart by controlling my emotions. 

Grantland Rice said that “I have the face of an angel and the temper of a timber wolf.”  It seemed that in the years leading up to 1921 this angel’s heart and head were not well connected to the cunning of the timber wolf.

Show the quote on the screen

Until I could place a halo on the head of that angel and then channel the cunning of the wolf into my play, I was not going to be a winner.

Let’s see, where should I begin….

I need to start – briefly – in the years leading up to 1921 and 1922 with my participation as a teenager during the Red Cross matches I played in to raise funds for the War-effort during World War I. 

Show poster or banner of the Red Cross match

In an effort to raise money to support fallen troops I, along with my teenage friends Perry and Alexa, played exhibition matches for the Red Cross.  Alexa had already won the US Women’s Amateur in 1918 so you could easily assume that she was the bigger draw for these events.  

At the time I was so darned serious.  I wanted every got shot I hit to be perfect.  When I mishit a shot or missed a short putt, the blood boil would start in my feet and hands and work its way to my neck and face creating a red-faced tempest that would burst into the open.  

When I burst, I exploded.  

And the explosion would often happen with me throwing a club or winding up and hurling a golf ball in some unknown direction.  

There came a time, in 1918, when we were playing a Red Cross match at the Brae Burn Club outside of Boston.   After hitting several successive poor shots my blood boiled over and I picked up my ball and threw it into the woods in front of the gallery that was following us.

Alexa came right up to me and said that for years she had tried to be patient and understanding but could take no more of my poor behavior. She told me she wished that “the ground beneath my feet would open-up and let me sink from sight.  She did not wish to be seen with me or playing with me”.  

And, while she spoke those words to me, I saw pity in her eyes.  

Alexa stared at me and continued, “You fool.  Imagine what this crowd, out here to support us and our country, is thinking of you now.”  

And I told her, “I don’t give a damn what anybody thinks about me.  I only get mad at myself.”

My temper display that day began to reinforce an opinion among the sportswriters by writing “Jones wasn’t all that he’s cut out to be and will never be a winner on the national stage. For all his athleticism, he is sorely lacking in maturity.”

Even though I had hurt my friend Alexa, my approach to the game stayed the same. I simply did not have the confidence or the maturity to recognize that my emotions and my temper were holding me back.  

In the ensuing years, with the War over but my golfing expectations running high, but no wins accomplished I was beginning to believe what the sportswriters were saying about me that I would never win.  

And then 1921 commenced which changed everything.

The first story from 1921 has to do with my travel to Great Britain to play, for my first time, in the British Amateur at Hoylake and the Open at St. Andrews.  

Words of support coming from the Great Harry Vardon encouraged fans from all over Britain to turn out to see for themselves “this player with the face of an angel” play the Old Course.

I must confess I was not on my best game while in Britain.  I lost in the 4th round at Hoylake which, I must admit, was farther than my play would reasonably allow me to advance.

But it all came to a head at St. Andrews.
I had heard and read about The Old Course but had not yet seen it until I stepped onto the 1st tee for a practice round before the Open. And when my eyes looked out across the old play field that was the 1st and 18th fairways, my first impression was that it was among the very worst courses I had ever seen.  

Show picture of first tee at St. Andrews

Given my maturity, I did not yet understand nor appreciate the uniqueness of the course; its strategy, the placement of its hazards, and the need to approach the green from certain angles.  

Frankly, I did not care to study and prepare for a course I found so uninteresting.  It was not worth my time.

I did not understand that to play the Old Course I needed the 10% of my ability to be connected to the 90% that existed ‘between my ears” and my heart.

Well, it was a Friday afternoon, in the second round of the Open at St. Andrews, on a windy day, at the Par 3 11th hole, in the famous Hill Bunker where my turn-around in painfully learning to win occurred. 

It was here that I committed an act of poor sportsmanship so egregious, that I get stomach pains to this very day – even now - thinking about what I did.

Show picture of the 11th hole at St. Andrews with Hill Bunker

As the tournament began I was not playing well that day.  

So, when I hit my tee-shot on the 11th into the Hill Bunker – which happens to be the most difficult bunker on the course – it took me four shots to get out and on to the green.  

When I arrived on the green to line up my putt, I could not control my emotions any longer.  I picked up my ball and pocketed it essentially disqualifying myself from the tournament.  

There were gasps from the crowd following us.  I simply did not care anymore.

I shudder just sharing this with you.

As mad as I was, I was so far from the clubhouse it would have been even worse form to walk in right then and there, so I decided to continue play even though I was now out of the tournament.  Continuing play would keep the pace for all the other competitors.   

But there was another egregious thing I did which is even more painful!

After hitting my drive on the 12th, I walked the fairway along-side my caddy.  I asked him if I could review the scorecard he was keeping on my behalf.  He reached into the inside pocket of his jacket and pulled it out to hand to me.  I recall taking the card, opening it, reviewing the scores I had placed.  

And then, suddenly, from out of nowhere, I ripped the card into three large pieces.  I actually tore up my scorecard!  (with emphasis)

My caddy stopped in his tracks.  He looked at me with what looked like tears in his eyes, and said, “No!  Mr. Bobby.  No!”   

My caddy was essentially repeating what Alexa had tried to say to me at that Red Cross match in Boston two years previous.  

He took the shreds from me, placed them back into his pocket, and kept walking down the fairway with my clubs slung over his now drooping shoulder.  He hung his head low for the remainder of the round, not saying a thing, to my or anyone else.  

My disgust for my own actions were soon replaced by what I thought was disgust for my play and for a course I thought I hated.  

Little did I know I would come to love the course at St. Andrews and the people of its town as much as I did my own family and friends in Atlanta.  

And as for the 11th hole, one day in 1950, the people of St. Andrews would name it, The Bobby Jones hole.

For the first time in my life I felt true embarrassment.  

I departed Great Britain a mere shadow of what people had come see and learn about me.

The British newspapers took my embarrassment one step further when they wrote about my leaving and the incident at St. Andrews.  They said, “Master Bobby Jones is boy, and a rather ordinary boy at that.”  

Show quote on the screen
He walks over to the table and lifts up a small wooden box
He opens the box and pulls out a golf ball, and several ripped up pieces of paper and shows them to the audience.

When I returned to St. Andrews in 1930 for The Open Championship, that caddy of mine was there and he was on my bag.  He was anxious to caddy for me as I was playing well.  But before we ventured out on the Old Course for a practice round, he said to me….

“Mister Bobby, I have somethin’ for ‘ye.  I am hoping ya won’t ge mad at me.  But I’ve been holdin’ these for almost ten years and I think ye should hav ‘em back.  Lets let ‘em be a reminder of what we’re not goin’ to do today!”

He reached into his pocket, pulled out a small bag and handed it to me.  Inside the bag held this…..

Open the box and pull out a golf ball and drop the shreds of paper on the table.

My caddy handed me my ball and my torn up scorecard from my first visit to St. Andrews.  

The immediate flashback I received at that moment was incredible.  I had never wanted to feel like that again….and here I was being reminded…. by someone who was pushing for me, not against me.  

My caddy – and my friend - was motivating me to do my best and be my best.  

I would go on to win that Open as part of my Grand Slam.

Hold up the ball and the scorecard to the audience.

I am forever grateful for what I consider these most memorable – and personal - tokens from my golfing career, and for what one simple man imparted on me in the lessons of life.  

Now you can see why I have chosen to save these tokens as opposed to trophies and medals in this room.  These represent life’s obstacles to overcome to achieve success.

Cicero noted, “Nothing stands out so conspicuously, or remains so firmly fixed in the memory, as something which you have blundered.”

How incredibly true and wise that is.
He gently places the ball and scorecard back into its box and places back on the desk.  
He lets out a big sigh…

But that was the first Lesson of 1921…..Now on to Lesson #2….

While St. Andrews “lit the match” for the fire in my transformation I wasn’t fully humiliated.  Full humiliation would come later that summer in the 1921 US Amateur Championship held at the St. Louis Country Club.   

Following the disaster in Britain, I vowed to keep my temper under control.  I was going to grow up.

I felt my game coming on.  I knew my length off the tee and the crispness with which I was hitting my irons would make me hard to beat.  I was confident.

I breezed through the Qualifying and the first two matches, and then came up against Wille Hunter in the 3rd round.  It was Willie who had won the British Amateur two months previous at Hoylake.

Insert picture of Willie Hunter
Hunter was a steady player.  He was cautious.  He was unflappable.  He was the Tortoise to my being the Hare.

During our 3rd round match I was outdriving him by 30 to 60 yards and yet, after the morning 18 holes, I was only 2-up. I told one of the sportswriters attending the tournament, “I outplayed him more than that his morning.”  

My frustration was building.

In the afternoon round my emotions started to get the better of me and Willie tied the match after 27 holes.  We had nine holes left to play.  When we came to the 15th hole all tied, I missed a two-foot putt to fall 1-down.   

A tempest was brewing.

On the 17th hole, I hit a poor approach to the green.  

I was so disgusted at myself that I threw my club toward the area where my bag was laying on the ground.  The club missed its target and hit a woman on the leg.  

I was mortified even though the spectator was not hurt.  

I lost the hole and the match.   One sportswriter lamented, “He’s probably the best shot-maker in golf, but given his emotions, he cannot win.”

Show quote on the screen

I left St. Louis like I left St. Andrews – winless, humiliated, and with public perception that I would never be a winner.

Several weeks later I received a letter in the mail from the President of the United States Golf Association – George Herbert Walker – yes, the grandfather of our President George H. W. Bush #41.  

Show pictures of George H. Walker, and G.W. Bush

His letter – while official, but quite personal – said that I would never be allowed to play in another USGA tournament unless I could control my temper.  

My father immediately instructed me to write a letter of apology to the USGA for my behavior. The letter was received with cautious optimism. 
Go to table, open the top drawer, and pull out the letter

I’ve kept these letters as a remembrance of my humiliation.  Lord, I hope I never have to write a letter like this ever again.

But those two events in 1921, when taken together, forced me to grow up.  But I needed to do grow up differently. 

Proof would be “in the pudding” as they say in 1922.    

Hold up the club, look at it, show it to the audience)

Besides the letter pertaining to the events of St. Louis, this is the approach club I used on the 17th hole that day and jettisoned toward my bag after that poor approach.  

I’ve kept it for all these years – in this room – just like the golf ball and scorecard from St. Andrews.  

Like the letter it’s a reminder.  It’s a motivator.  It’s a painful memory.  It’s always on display.  It keeps me grounded and balanced.  Pun intended (said with a smile)

So, here is where Lesson #3 from early in 1922, at Skokie, that finally came to my rescue.

On the train from Atlanta heading to Chicago, I got into a conversation about “Championship Golf” with my travel partner, O.B. Keeler, the sportwriter from the Atlanta Journal Constitution.
  
O.B. had become my regular travel partner following a request by my father to have him accompany me to tournaments since my father’s law practice required him to be with his clients in Atlanta.

O.B. was a thoughtful and reflective man.  We talked a lot about a lot of things which also served as a sort of “traveling classroom” for me.  He was a regular renaissance man, if you know what I mean.

For example, we would read a translation of Cicero and then talk about it.  Or we would read a work of Dickens and then explore its different characters.  I was getting the best of a liberal education!  I loved it.
So, as I sat in his berth on the train to Chicago with the sound of the tracks clicking along underneath us, I asked him, “I wonder if I am ever going to win one of these things?”

Show quote below on the screen

O.B. leaned forward, spoke softly but sternly, and said to me, “Bob, if you ever get it through your head that whenever you step on the first tee of any competition and know that you are the best golfer in the field, then you’ll win this championship and many others.  You need to play for yourself and within yourself – and not for your father, the people of Atlanta, or anyone else.  Play the game for the enjoyment it gives you.  When you do that, your time will come.”

O.B. was telling me to channel my head and my heart into having fun competing.  He did not want me to add any more pressure than what I already was placing on myself.  If I had enjoyment, the winning would follow.

I was 20 years old when taking that train trip.  I was beginning to mature enough to understand he was right.

While I didn’t win at Skokie, I came close.  And O.B.’s words of wisdom rang true.  Here’s what happened…

I arrived in Chicago a week ahead of the tournament to get acclimated to the course.  
The club sat amid a neighborhood surrounded by many beautiful large homes, just like those you see at Merion.  On a few streets there were smaller homes that people called Cottages and were owned by members who lived in downtown Chicago but wanted a place to stay when they ventured out from the city on weekends.  

Rather than having to deal with the daily travel challenges from downtown to the course, the Club offered competitors, if they wanted, a chance to stay in members’ homes, or rent one of their nearby cottages.  

O.B. and I decided to rent one of the cottages that was located directly across the street from the course.  It was convenient and peaceful.

Now, if you’ll allow me another quick tangent, but I cannot let myself forget to share this as there is an important lesson here, too…..

(Shifting gears).. Sarazen is essentially the patron saint of Skokie, right?  Did you know his win over me in the ’22 US Open Championship was, in many ways, similar to Ouimet’s win six years earlier given the impact it had on people around the country?

Why?

Well, Gene was a 20 year old professional golfer from New York of Italian descent.  He was a former caddy.

His background was similar to Ouimet’s.  He came from a hardworking immigrant family who was taught to be humble and self-sufficient, and to always work hard at whatever endeavor you were pursuing.

I recall meeting Gene for the very first time in 1921 at the US Open that was being held at the Columbia Country Club in Maryland.  

We did not know one another when we were paired together in the first round at Columbia.  I seem to recall we really did not talk at all during that first day of play.

Gene was a skillful player and could really chip and putt the golf ball. He always knew how to score and get the ball in the hole.  

Well, one night before the tournament while I was sitting on the front porch of the cottage we were staying in across the street from Skokie, I saw a golfer moving from spot to spot around the club’s 8th green hitting approach shot after approach shot to different places on the green.  

I was fascinated. 
I got up out of my chair and walked across the street to see for myself who this was and what was going on.  

As I drew close, through the dusk I could see it was Gene.  I reintroduced myself to him and he said to me, “I know who you are. I am just surprised you know who I am or even remember me.”

Well, that broke the ice and together we talked about how to play Skokie. 

We both agreed that the strength of the course and its ability to defend par rested in its greens and their approaches since the course, overall, was relatively short.

When I asked him what he was doing, he showed me how he was planning his approaches. 

And, what’s important here, is that my competitor was telling me – no, sharing with me - where he wanted to “miss his shot” for the best recovery to get close to the pin and a good score. 

Show Gene’s quote from below 

Gene said “seeking perfection from a golf shot is a lot like seeking to be or play God.  It will never happen.  What you want to do is be prepared for it not happening so you are not disappointed and can think clearly about what to do next.”  

What insight.  

In all my years up to that point I was always chasing perfection and letting my emotions get the better of me when perfection did not appear!

We stayed on Skokie’s 8th green for over an hour as dark descended on the course.  By the time we finished you could see lights coming from the clubhouse not too far away, and the voices of members on the patio mingling with the light music playing in the background.  

We shook hands and wished one another the best in the tournament, and as I headed back to my cottage, I recalled another of Cicero’s remarks, “Kindness is stronger than fear”

Show Cicero quote

Gene Sarazen feared no one because he was kind to everyone.  
Our hour together reinforced for me his coming greatness and is one I will always remember.

I can say my lifelong friendship with Gene began that evening on Skokie’s 8th on the eve of the US Open, but his little lesson, in the culmination of my golf experiences to that point, changed my life. 

The 1922 Open brought all the great players of the day to Skokie.  Skokie was supposed to be my breakthrough tournament since the course was playing fast and firm.  I felt I was ready.

Walter Hagen was in the field having just arrived from across the pond after winning the British Open.  He brought with him the British Open trophy and put it on display next to the U.S. Open trophy. 

Show picture of two trophies together

It was the first time in golf history that the two trophies appeared in public together.  And Hagen had vowed to win at Skokie as it would make him the first American – professional or amateur - to hold the Open and US Open championships in the same year.

Lots was at stake.
Like all good golf stories, this one comes down to the final eighteen holes played on the final day.

As history records, on that final day of the final round Gene Sarazen teed off close to an hour ahead of me for his final eighteen holes with little to no one following his pairing.  

Being “sneaky long” with his driver, Gene started blasting long tee shots underneath the breeze that was coming in off of Lake Michigan.  Those long tee shots set up approaches he was hitting close to the hole allowing him to score.

As everyone knows, Gene came to Skokie’s 18th and hit a beautiful drive, into the wind and down the middle.  A par-5 hole, Gene was 250 yards from the hole and a par five would get him a final round 69 and a score of 278.  

Gene credits his caddy for suggesting he hit his driver again, under the wind, and try for the green with his second shot.  A birdie would produce a final round score of 68 that would be tough to beat.  

And that’s exactly what Gene did!  He hit the driver from the fairway on to the green, secured a two-putt birdie four, and posted a score of 277.
Just as Gene was making his birdie four, I was standing on Skokie’s 10th tee, and I saw him make his putt.  With the large crowds following us, the news was that I needed to shoot par on the back nine to finish with an overall score of 277 to tie.

I knew what I needed to do and promptly bogeyed the 10th and 12th holes.  I could feel the blood inside me beginning to boil.

Here we go again!

I got a birdie on the 14th hole to close within one back of a tie.  I needed another birdie.  I hit my approach on Skokie’s par-4 16th to 10 feet of the hole but I missed the putt.

Standing on the 17th tee I knew I needed to finish par – birdie to tie Gene.  I was confident as I knew I could get home in two on the 18th.  All I had to do was par Skokie’s 17th.

Now, in 1922 Skokie’s 17th green was new.  The hole had just been lengthened to provide the challenge and opportunity necessary in the closing round of a major tournament.  

During the tournament the press described Skokie’s 17th hole as “a 425 yard beautiful driving hole that leads to a grim tableland in a desert of trouble.”

Here is one time the press really printed the truth!

Show quote on screen.

I hit one of my best drives that day perfectly cutting the corner of the dogleg over a large gaping sand trap.

But my ball took a curious and unfortunate bounce into a gully set amid a group of trees on the left side of the fairway.  

I tried to hit a low-lining approach that would run up the slope in front of the green and on to the “table top”.  But it was not to be.  

My approach ended up just short and ran back down the false-front of the hilly green leaving me with a 15-yard pitch that I did not get up and down.

So, you ask, where is the lesson in all of this?

As I walked to the 18th tee, now two-strokes back and needing an eagle to tie, I passed O.B. and my teacher, Stewart Maiden, who were in the gallery following me.  They looked dejected after viewing my bogey five.  

But a new fire inside of me did something different this time. The fire placed a smile on my face and I walked up to them and said, “Don’t let your chin drag.  Its not as bad as all that!”

That was it.  I finally had learned my lesson.  I was having fun competing.  

I played Skokie’s 18th for everything it offered.  I hit my second approach just over the green and lipped out my eagle approach and settled for a birdie and second place.  

In evaluating my loss – or should I now say “near win” – at Skokie, O.B. reminded me on the train ride back from Chicago to Atlanta that I was moving up in Open championships from 8th in 1920, to 5th in 1921, to now 2nd in 1922.  

I would breakthrough in 1923 and win my first U.S. Open at Inwood on Long Island.
But more than that, by having fun competing as I did at Skokie taught me how to win.  So much so that from 1923 until my retirement in 1930, no amateur ever finished higher than me in the US Open.  And, also in that span I won 4 US Open’s, 5 US Amateurs, 3 British Open’s and the British Amateur.  

Many have said my performance in those years is one of the greatest winning runs in all of sports. 

And to think it all started in 1922 at Skokie Country Club.

You might be asking yourself, what painful keepsake did I hold on to from Skokie to remind me of how I learned to win?  There was no golf ball or scorecard, or letter or club involved.

Well, I do have one thing….

He walks over to the table and holds up a book.  
He walks back to center stage and holds up a copy of The Bobby Jones story.

This book is my remembrance.  For you see, it’s the only authorized biography ever made and was written by my good friend, O.B.
O.B. was there with me for almost my entire golfing life and he saw the “myth” and the “reality” of what it meant to live as Bob Jones.

If you remember, god-like sports characters back in the 1920’ didn’t have their temper-tantrums written about.  This book is about as close to telling my mortal-side as it gets.  I need to keep it around to remind me that from all the stories that did get into print, there are other stories and memories that must be kept so I might stay true to myself.

These are my reminders.

Cicero and his writings were very influential to me.  

Since I’ve quoted him a few times tonight, let me offer this last quote as a summary of my life and experiences….”The Spirit is the true self.  The spirit, the will to win, and the will to excel are the things that endure.”

Show quote on the screen

I’m going to let that quote sink in while I pour myself another drink

Go over to the bar, add some ice cubes and make a small pour
Go over to the chair, with the cane, sit down, take a sip and look at the audience.

It’s the intangible things that endure….Yes, while my wins have endured in their trophies and medals, what’s really more important is the enduring path one takes to get there and the experiences one has from which to learn.

I like to think that my spirit will endure and perhaps some of the memories and lessons shared tonight will leave here with you and get shared with others.  

They endured for me  I hope they will be as enduring for you.

Its been a wonderful experience to invite you into my den this evening.  I’ve enjoyed every minute…and I didn’t even drink alone.

Thank you.  And good night.












